Lender Fees





These are generated by your lender, as the cost of creating and funding your mortgage. People who buy houses for cash won’t need to pay these fees, but most people have a mortgage on their home. You can shop around for different lenders if you want your closing costs to be a little bit lower, but you shouldn’t base your choice of a mortgage lender solely on the fees.











Demystify Your Closing Costs—Contact Our Experts!








Ready to understand every detail of your closing costs? Connect with Arizona Mortgage Brothers for personalized advice and a stress-free closing experience.











Get in Touch
















Title Company Fees





When you close your real estate transaction and your mortgage is funded by the lender, a title company will be involved. They will help you sign everything, and they will also do a search to make sure the title to the property you’re buying is clear. That’s not a free service, so you can expect to see some fees for the title company on your HUD-1, which gives all the closing information. The title company also charges to record the deed and the mortgage with the county, and prepare all the paperwork to transfer the deed from the seller’s name to yours.





Appraisal Fees





An important mortgage closing cost is the appraisal fee. An appraisal is required by your lender, to make sure the house is worth the amount you want to borrow. Expect to see that fee on your closing statement, and to pay it at closing.





Pest Inspections





Termites and other pests can really cause damage to a house. You may have to pay for a pest inspection, to make sure the home doesn’t have any wood-destroying organisms in it before your lender will fund your loan.





Septic and Well Certifications





If the house you’re buying has a septic tank and/or a well for drinking water, both of those will have to be inspected and certified before you can close your real estate transaction. You will probably be asked to pay for those, although the seller might agree to do so.





Condo Questionnaire Fees





If you’re buying a condo, another mortgage closing cost may be the questionnaire fees. Condos have specific ways they do things, and they may require more from you than a typical home purchase would. If you expect these fees and are ready for them, you can avoid any unpleasant surprises at closing.